The prospect of EU citizenship paired with a solid investment is attracting SA families looking for a plan B or to settle in another country. Portugal’s €350,000 (R5.8m) investment option, in particular, has been in high demand. John Dunn from Sable International looks at the processes and the options for obtaining a Golden Visa. The Portugal Golden Visa allows you to live and work in Portugal and gives you visa-free travel throughout the European Schengen area. After five years, you and your immediate family can qualify for permanent residence and potentially citizenship thereafter. Benefits of having a Golden Visa include the following: 1. Make a €1m capital investment This can be in the form of a fund deposit into a Portuguese bank account, the purchase of Portuguese stocks and bonds, or a company investment. 2. Create 10 jobs If you employ 10 workers at minimum wage and all employees pay social security, you can qualify for a Golden Visa. There is no minimum investment for this route. 3. Buy a property for €500,000 or €350,000 This is a popular option among investors. You must buy a property, or multiple properties, with a minimum value of €500,000 (about R8.2m). The property you buy can be rented out. 4. Make a private equity investment of €350,000 There has been high demand for the €350,000 (R4.9m) property category for investors seeking a comparatively cheaper route to attaining a Golden Visa. “Compared with the straightforward property purchase of the €500,000 route, the €350,000 option has a few more requirements to satisfy, but the capital savings more than make up for the hassle,” says Dunn. According to Golden Visa requirements, a €350,000 investment can be made in a number of ways: “We’ve had great interest and success with a private-equity fund offered by the purchase of the Vintage Hotel in Lisbon,” says Dunn. The Vintage Hotel is a five-star hotel located in Lisbon’s city centre. Its superb location offers guests easy access to the surrounding neighbourhoods where they can experience Lisbon’s excellent nightlife. Managed by an experienced hotel operator, it is already running successfully and boasts a good income and capital growth potential. Through an investment firm, share in the hotel that fit the requirements for a Golden Visa have been made available for purchase. “There’s already been an overwhelming amount of interest, with more than 70% of the shares already purchased. It offers investors an excellent way to attain a Golden Visa and a share of a professionally managed five-star institution,” says Dunn. “Compared with other more traditional property GRV investment options, you can save up to €45,000 [about R740,000] on your purchase expenses by investing in a solution like The Vintage Hotel. “This route is gaining traction, especially with foreign investors, because it offers an attractive investment and provides you and your family members with the full benefits of Portugal’s Golden Visa programme.” Benefits of the Vintage PEF investment “Undergoing this type of process alone leaves you exposed to unnecessary risk. If you’re looking at buying a property for between R7m and R10m, there is a certain amount of risk involved in real-estate investment. To do this in a foreign country and currency adds to that potential risk,” says Dunn. “Sable has key partnerships with legal advisers and consultants in Portugal across all critical areas. Having worked with these sponsors extensively, we consider the Vintage PEF to be one of the best choices for obtaining your Portuguese Golden Visa. “If you want to secure your chance of investing in the Vintage Hotel PEF, it’s important that you contact us before subscriptions close in December 2019.” Sable International’s consultants are the leading experts on the Golden Visa. To discuss the Vintage PEF route in more detail, send an e-mail to goldenvisa@sableinternational.com or call +2721 657 1584. This article was paid for by Sable International.