SA is excellent at insurance. Walk into the boardroom of a foreign insurer and you are likely to hear positive mention of specific SA insurers and their leading innovations. There’s a budding theory about this: SA insurers have been subjected to unique pressures that created innovative mindsets. SA’s historically untapped mass market segment, for example, offered unique opportunities and unique challenges. Traditional insurance products couldn’t and didn’t work in this segment. So SA insurers went to work on finding a solution. What followed was a range of unique, tailored solutions that spoke to the specific needs of the SA mass market. Similarly, SA has some of the world’s most complex and difficult conditions for motor insurance. But insurers innovated with telematics products to create attractive products for motorists. Drivers of change By some coincidence, SA also has a very strong cohort of actuaries. The exact causes merit some investigation, but  actuarial science remains a much more prestigious and popular field of study here than in many other countries. Due to these  and other contextual factors  SA has historically punched above its weight in the race for innovation in insurance. But there is now a new set of forces in motion that demand further leaps forward. There are four primary drivers of change in insurance: Significant disruption is already occurring, and SA insurers and actuaries should be ready for the new wave of innovation that will surely follow. We see several concrete implications of these forces of change. To stay competitive and meet customer expectations, insurers must digitise all elements of their business. The old compliance and process-based way of work does not meet the needs of the moment; data and analytics are the future of insurance and companies should invest now in their data science capabilities. Despite the intense focus on technology, insurers must retain a human touch. In those critical moments when people face adversity and rely on their insurer, human judgment and human support remain non-negotiable. Sound, data-driven strategies, executed rapidly with agile ways of working, most likely within the context of insurance ecosystems, is the key for SA to remain at the cutting edge of insurance. • Ikdal is a senior partner MD at the Boston Consulting Group. This is an extract from a speech delivered to the Actuarial Society of SA’s annual national convention.