A judgment by the Constitutional Court has ended years of litigation around whether controversial former senior National Prosecuting Authority (NPA) officials Nomgcobo Jiba and Lawrence Mrwebi can remain advocates. The court justices dismissed the General Council of the Bar’s (GCB)  application for leave to appeal against the Supreme Court of Appeal (SCA) judgment which placed the pair back on the roll of advocates but did not actually venture into whether they were indeed fit and proper to be advocates. It dismissed the application on the basis of not having jurisdiction in the matter. The SCA had overturned a high court judgment which struck them from the roll of advocates. Justice Chris Jafta, who wrote the unanimous judgment, said the GCB did not raise a constitutional issue, constitutional right or an arguable point of law in its appeal. Jiba and Mrwebi, however, could end up in court again to start yet another legal battle, this time relating to their fitness to hold office in the NPA, following an inquiry. The inquiry, which found that their actions brought the NPA into disrepute, led to them being fired by President Cyril Ramaphosa. Both look set to take the report on review if parliament confirms their axing. Jiba, former deputy national director of public prosecutions, and Mrwebi, former special director of public prosecutions, have been two of the most controversial figures in the NPA over the past decade, with Jiba specifically being seen as former president Jacob Zuma’s right-hand person in the prosecuting authority. The axing of the pair by Ramaphosa in April this year was widely seen as part of restoring the integrity of the NPA. Even though the judgment by the Constitutional Court on Thursday was separate to the inquiry, other judgments against the two, which were initially used by the GCB in their application to have them struck from the roll, formed part of the inquiry conducted by former Constitutional Court judge Yvonne Mokgoro and her team. Those judgments related to three politically sensitive prosecutorial decisions: dropping graft charges against former crime intelligence boss Richard Mdluli, instituting racketeering charges against former KwaZulu-Natal Hawks head Johan Booysen, and the DA’s bid to obtain the “spy tapes”, which were used as grounds to drop charges against Zuma. Jiba’s lawyer Zola Majavu on Thursday said the judgment was welcome and they now awaited the parliamentary process. He said Jiba had instructed them to take Mokgoro’s report on review if parliament confirms Ramaphosa’s decision. Both Jiba and Mrwebi did not know when the parliamentary process will take place. Mrwebi told Business Day he was “very happy” with the judgment. “It was what I expected it to be.” He said he would take his next action on a step-by-step basis, but he first wanted to make his case in parliament. “If they decide against me, it is definite that I will take the matter on review,” Mrwebi said. He said it would entail challenging the inquiry’s report, the president’s firing of him and Jiba, and parliament’s decision to confirm that. mailovichc@businesslive.co.za