German family-owned investment group Aton has once again exercised its “sole and absolute” discretion to extend the deadline for the mandatory takeover of Murray & Roberts (M&R) to end-September. The latest extension  creates more uncertainty about M&R’s fate after Aton, which owns 44% in the engineering group, announced in 2018 plans to buy out the other shareholders in the company. Aton said on Thursday it had extended the deadline date  to make a mandatory offer to M&R’s shareholders from June 30 to September 30. Aton initially gave a long-stop date of March 31. It later extended that to June 30.  The offer, which values M&R at R7.6bn, requires approval from the competition authorities in Australia, Namibia, SA, the US and Zambia, according to the offer circular. In March, Aton obtained a conditional approval in Zambia and an unconditional approval in Namibia.  In terms of the new timelines, Aton has until September 30 to get consent from all the jurisdictions. Aton, which is majority owned by the Helmig family of Germany, said it had chosen to extend the deadline, adding that the circular entitled it to push the long-stop date further “in its sole and absolute discretion”. M&R spokesperson Eduard Jardim  said Aton retained the sole discretion to extend the  date, “but we were expecting an extension this week as we had not received any feedback from the Competition Commission on the mandatory offer,  and the previous long-stop date was 30 June 2019”. M&R has told shareholders to reject the R17 per share offer, saying the share’s fair value was between R20 and R22. M&R shares were up 5.79% at R14.44 on Thursday. At the company’s interim results announcement in March, M&R said its board had conducted another valuation of the group and  reiterated that the R17 per share undervalued the firm’s shares. “We stand by this statement,” Jardim said on Thursday. If Aton received the required approvals before September 30, M&R would have 10 days to consider the offer. In the circular, Aton said the offer was an opportunity for M&R shareholders to realise value in cash and divest their shares at a premium, “which is attractive considering the low trading volumes in M&R shares on the JSE”. Aton said the M&R shareholders had a chance to divest “in an otherwise illiquid environment”. The R17 represents a 77.3% premium over the M&R closing price of March 22 2018, the last day prior to the offer. Aton said the offer was attractive given the uncertain market outlook in M&R key markets. It said M&R would benefit from the expertise of and investment by an international player. njobenis@businesslive.co.za