While the Fourth Industrial Revolution brings with it global concerns of deepening inequality, in Africa, new evidence suggests that digitalisation and big data could bring more inclusive growth through real job creation. According to the latest edition of Africa’s Pulse, the World Bank’s bi-annual analysis of the state of African economies, digital transformation could increase regional economic growth by up to 2% per annum, providing fresh opportunities for inclusive growth through innovation, service delivery and job creation. Africa has the world’s fastest growing labour force. About 11-million young Africans will enter the labour market annually over the next decade. But with less than one quarter of these expected to secure stable jobs, real growth and new jobs are crucial for the development of the continent and social stability. Africa has already demonstrated its capacity to harness digital technologies. These have helped the continent leapfrog traditional models of development, and mobile telephony is a great example of this. From being almost entirely disconnected just 25 years ago, today Africa boasts over a billion SIM connections with an 80% subscription penetration. There are more than 500-million smartphones across the continent, which most Africans use as their primary access to broadband internet as data costs are rapidly decreasing. This has connected Africans around the continent and with the world, and has enabled those who were economically excluded to access a range of facilities from financial services to mapping and healthcare. Mobile connectivity and data has improved the lives of millions through greater efficiencies, while igniting new areas of economic productivity by awakening dormant opportunities and finding workable solutions to some of the continent’s most daunting challenges. Despite this, Africa still lags behind other digital economies around the world, with comparatively low access to digital technologies. Some examples from theAfrica’s Pulse report include: These statistics indicate a severe infrastructure deficit and the need for deeper investments in the digital economy for Africa to keep pace and avoid falling further behind the international norm. This, along with basic literacy and skills, financial services, platforms and digital entrepreneurship, were outlined by the World Bank report as the five foundational areas that will harness the opportunities of digitalisation in the Fourth Industrial Revolution. Key aspects to these five foundations include: According to the World Bank, 90% of all jobs in developing countries are created by the private sector. Entrepreneurship and the growth of small- and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) are key to future employment. African governments can contribute by creating a vibrant business environment conducive to growing digital economies that allow small businesses to scale well beyond their immediate borders. The full economic potential of digital technologies cannot benefit only a small elite if they are to have a real and lasting impact on Africa’s development. The continent has two options: harness the opportunities presented by the digital revolution to foster new opportunities through connectedness and greater economic inclusion; or run the risk of isolation, widening inequalities and market stagnation. The World Bank plans to invest $25bn in Africa’s digital transformation over the next decade. It hopes to match this with $25bn more from the private sector. This investment is based on the belief that Africa is pivotal to the future of global development, when we will witness a collision of demographics and technology, and where the role of data and digitalisation will be key to a positive outcome. However, technology, innovation and entrepreneurs are not enough. African governments must act now to support these changes and the players driving the new world of work and business toward inclusive growth and digitalised job creation. • Prof White is the senior director of the Johannesburg Business School at the University of Johannesburg. Liezl Rees is the head of the Centre for African Business at JBS.