Following the release of the much-anticipated report by the presidential advisory panel on land reform and agriculture, it is time to consider a clear plan with specific implementable steps. Such a plan should be simple and straightforward, with everyone playing their part in delivering on the vision of a more equitable distribution of land. The land debate is central to our process of dealing with SA’s regrettable history of dispossession, and it is therefore understandable that the solutions will be contested. This conflict is evident in the report, which presents areas of compromise and trade-offs between different schools of thought instead of providing clear advice to the government on implementation and delivery. Nevertheless, the report has provided some key principles (and conclusions) that provide some clarity and certainty as well as a clear direction for action. These are: The report does, however, raise a number of points and recommendations that are against agricultural economic logic and intuition and on which, together with agricultural economist and Business Day columnist Wandile Sihlobo, I have pronounced in an earlier series of articles on these pages. These points are specifically: Expropriation without compensation (EWC): We have highlighted the problems and unintended consequences with a blanket approach to the expropriation of land and also argued that this can, in any case, be implemented without amending the constitution by merely finalising the Expropriation Bill. Care should, however, be taken in how the bill is framed, given that the various categories of land and other property for expropriation without compensation by the panel could all be challenged due to the vagueness of the concepts of “abandoned”; “vacant”; “speculative” or “indebted” land. That said, it is worth noting that “expropriation without compensation” is the one area that the panel had limited influence over. Parliament had already resolved to re-establish the ad hoc committee dealing with a possible constitutional amendment before the panel’s report was released. Moreover, the panel’s terms of reference specified that it should clarify the areas and conditions under which EWC can be applied, not whether the panel favoured the approach or not. Land ceilings: Wandile and I have also highlighted the problems related to this idea and articulated the  insurmountable problems the state will have in implementing a land ceiling policy. (How do you, for example, define the maximum land size in different production zones and for different farm enterprises? How do you legislate for all the different permutations and combinations?) The government effort and budget associated with this messy exercise should rather be used in improving land administration systems and allocating state land to beneficiaries and partnering with developers to  establish more housing stock for the large  accommodation need in urban areas. I will use this series of articles in Business Day to present a few pointers for a detailed plan for a radical but sustainable redistribution of agricultural land. I extract the solutions for fast redistributive land reform from the key points of the advisory panel’s report, but expand them into practical steps with some clear responsibilities for the wealthy elite, agribusiness, financial institutions and farmers. Before doing so it is important to mention the critical points of departure: These elements are complementary to the success and profitability of the farming or household enterprise and  the absence of any one of them will become a binding constraint, resulting in low profitability and ultimately a “low-equilibrium poverty trap”. A sustainable land reform programme can therefore not focus on land and property rights alone. Co-ordinating the delivery of the aforementioned elements is difficult, and even more so in times of political contestation, limited government funds and no capable state. The state should therefore at best provide the framework and incentives that will inspire the various role players to act and implement initiatives that are in the social interest and that will achieve the vision of a more equitable and inclusive agricultural economy. In next week’s article, I will expand in more detail on the design of the policy to facilitate land and financial donations for a fast-track land reform programme. • Prof Kirsten is director of the Bureau for Economic Research at Stellenbosch University.