Although the National Credit Amendment Act introduces several changes to the current law, the inclusion of debt intervention is most significant. It is welcome for consumers who have previously been excluded from formal debt relief procedures. This inequality in our credit and insolvency legislation has left many desperate consumers to face the full impact of debt enforcement without any avenue for surrender. In both debt review and insolvency proceedings, more affluent consumers benefit from some form of credit write-offs, but good-faith low- or no-income earners are forced to pay their full debt obligation and additional, often exorbitant, legal costs. The lower-income segment of the consumer market seldom accesses statutory debt counselling as a solution. One  reason for this may be that debt counsellors generally avoid these consumers due to the low fees that can be recovered for the same administrative burden. Consumers with no or low  income can furthermore not be placed under debt review as the process requires   them to make a reasonable partial payment towards their debt. The concerns raised by the credit industry gravitates towards the possible economic impact of debt extinguishment and the risk  of increasing the cost of credit to low-income earners. Although these two aspects are significant considerations,  their severity has been overstated. The representatives of the credit industry’s own submission allude to a maximum impact of debt interventions of about R20bn. This fatalistic prediction is based on the highly improbable worst-case scenario. Not every consumer who falls within the applicable income group will apply for debt intervention, as there are personal consequences for applying. Of those  who do apply, not everyone will succeed and even fewer will be entitled to debt extinguishment. Further, the R20bn suggested impact is a mere 1% of the gross debtors’ book. The gross outstanding debtors’ book in SA amounts to R1.73-trillion, of which 85% is owed to banks and nonbank vehicle financiers. Secure credit  makes up more than 74% of the gross outstanding debtors’ book. Secured credit will not be  affected by the proposed debt intervention. Considering that 10-million of the 24-million credit-active consumers are in arrears and cannot afford their debt instalments, a meagre 1% debt extinguishment — aimed at  providing much-needed relief to already debt-stressed consumers — is justifiable. A total 25% of unsecured debts are already in arrears and will form part of the 1%. Most of the debts that will be subject to debt intervention would therefore already have been provided for in the lenders’ books. The threat of an increase in the cost of credit is also somewhat overstated. Many  credit providers servicing this portion of the market are already charging the maximum prescribed interest rates and fees. There might be an initial knee-jerk reaction to the new process, as was seen at the introduction of the National Credit Act in 2007, but  the industry will probably readjust and settle within a few months. Main concerns Although the introduction of debt intervention fills a gap in our insolvency legislation, it is doubtful that it will be able to provide the intended relief. The practical application of the process may prove to be more complex than anticipated. It is thus doubtful whether even as little as R100m of applicable capital outstanding will be written off in the first year or two. The primary reason is that the application process requires a consumer to apply to the National Credit Regulator (NCR), and successful applications must then be considered by the National Consumer Tribunal. This poses the following main concerns: The purpose of the introduction of debt intervention in the SA legislative framework is supported. This form of so-called poor man’s sequestration is not an original construct and has been introduced in some  form in several other countries. The initial hysteria over the possible consequences of the process must be unpacked and filtered. The likely consequences of the bill must be addressed without the sensational being overstated or it being oversimplified. The procedural challenges posed are still unanswered. Many of our clients originate from the SA mining sector, in which we have learnt that debt-ridden consumers often require assistance in accessing debt relief, whether in the form of debt counselling or challenging their credit providers on unlawful charges or reckless loans. The NCR is yet to give clarity on how these consumers will be assisted. Many commentators on this issue are protecting their industry or constituents with false narratives. Regrettably, such comments could have a devastating impact on the economy that will increase the cost of credit and fuel the loan shark industry. At best these commentators are ill-informed, but most likely they are creating a false narrative to support their profit motive. In its current form, it is doubtful that the impact of this legislation will amount to more than R100m in capital written off over the next year or two. • Gardner is founder and CEO of Summit Financial Partners.