Shoprite’s shares fell to their worst level since early 2016 on Tuesday after Africa’s largest food retailer cut its full-year dividend by more than a third as trading losses in the rest of Africa dented profits. Group CEO Pieter Engelbrecht said it was “a testing year” in SA, while foreign-exchange shortages and currency devaluations in other markets, as well as rampant inflation in Angola, “took a further toll on our non-SA business”. Food prices in Angola doubled over the past year, he said. Sales from the company’s domestic supermarkets business rebounded in the second half of the year to end-June, but the international supermarkets division made a full-year trading loss of R265m. Shoprite’s shares fell as much as 9.3% to R126.83 on Tuesday afternoon, which would be the worst close since January 20 2016. Until trading conditions improved in the region, Engelbrecht said Shoprite was reining in capital expenditure in the rest of Africa and closing unprofitable stores in a bid to cut costs. But he said “we are very committed to the continent”. “To replace what’s already there in terms of infrastructure is almost unimaginable,” he said, referring to Shoprite’s distribution and store networks. The group operates in 14 markets outside SA. However, the group would consider leaving certain markets if conditions worsened. “We have made hard decisions before,” he said, citing exits from Egypt, Tanzania, India and Madagascar. “If a hard decision needs to be taken, we will take it.” Shoprite said in a statement that “persistently challenging trading conditions in the year ahead are likely to hamper our ability to return to profitability” in the rest of Africa. Shoprite’s group merchandise sales rose 3.6% to R150.4bn, thanks to the better second half, but total net profit for the year fell 18.2% to R4.3bn. The group said it would pay a final dividend of 163c a share, taking the total dividend for the year to 319c, a 34.1% decline. Meanwhile, Shoprite said that since the end of June, it has maintained its sales momentum from supermarkets in SA. The Usave chain is“reaping the benefits of our restored in-stock position”. Selling price inflation at domestic supermarkets has slowly increased in recent months to 2.5%. “We’ve entered 2020 bolstered by our success over the past six months with the knowledge that our continued operational focus will be combined with consolidating our financial position by reducing inventories, critically assessing capital expenditure, and, where appropriate, selling selected assets to redirect capital towards future growth projects,” Shoprite said. Engelbrecht said that as part of the group’s plan to sell non-strategic assets, it is considering disposals of distribution centres in SA, which it would then rent back. Negotiations on the sale of the company’s distribution centre in Brackenfell are at an advanced stage, CFO Anton de Bruyn said. The group’s property portfolio has a book value of about R7bn, and a higher market value, De Bruyn said. Proceeds from sales will be used for other purposes that will  yield better returns, including technology projects, he said. Meanwhile, Engelbrecht said he expects governments to control the prices of basic foods in the future. Because of this, Shoprite is trying to grow its alternative business lines, including its financial services offering. Correction: August 20 2019 An earlier version of this article stated that Shoprite's shares were on track to close at an eight-year low, which was incorrect. They are on track to close at their worst level in over three years. Business Day regrets the error. hedleyn@businesslive.co.za