In the light of Standard Bank’s decision to retrench more than a thousand people, many advisors have proposed small-, medium- and micro-sized enterprises (SMME) development as an answer to joblessness. In addition, SMME development is constantly promoted as the answer to SA’s youth unemployment problem. The importance of SMMEs is emphasised in most major policy engagements, from President Cyril Ramaphosa’s 2018 and 2019 state of the nation addresses, to the employment summit. As SMMEs are seen as a driver of economic development, SMME development has been linked to local procurement initiatives in the mining industry. Local procurement is driven by regulatory requirements that are linked to mining licences and so SMME development initiatives have multiplied. The regulatory pressure to procure locally is mirrored by significant conflict around benefit sharing in mining communities. There is strong pressure from communities for mines to share the benefits of mining locally, going beyond the provision of job opportunities. In many mining communities, business forums have sprung up to advocate for access to supply-chain opportunities for local businesses. In the face of this pressure, the emphasis in the development and support of SMMEs in the mining sector is increasingly on impact rather than compliance. Previously, it was enough to demonstrate that training and support of SMMEs had taken place. Currently, the pressure for inclusion of SMMEs in supply chains has meant that SMME development and support needs to result in viable and sustainable businesses. What no one has really solved is that SMMEs in SA face a high failure rate in the first five years of their lifecycle. This cycle of promotion and then failure of SMMEs can be seen as deepening the cycle of poverty. In Markets on the Margins: Mine Workers, Job Creation and Enterprise Development, Kate Philip questions the central assumption that enterprise development is a clear route out of poverty, when it can actually be set up to deepen poverty or trap people in a cycle of poverty. In her book, Philip provides insight into enterprise development in SA, drawn from 14 years at the Mineworkers Development Agency (MDA). The book is an important read for anyone who is interested in poverty reduction strategies in SA, particularly in mining areas. Enterprise vs inequality One of the first critiques that can be made of current enterprise development thinking is that enterprise development practices are often not mindful enough of the implications of structural inequalities in SA. Aspects of structural economy which Philip highlights in particular are income inequality and the impacts of concentration and spatial inequality. She stresses that first time entrepreneurs often find it difficult to compete with entrenched businesses while starting their own businesses. It is important to consider the difficulty of competing with entrenched activities, when developing enterprises. From my own observations of this space, people often understand that entrenched interests have the scale that make it tricky to compete on costs. I believe we should not underestimate the intimate understanding of customer needs and relationships of trust that develop in established, long-term business relationships, making competition difficult and unequal. Philip links the need to understand the structural challenges in SA with the need for a holistic understanding of the environment in which we are intervening. Drawing on project examples, she highlights the danger of projectising poverty and implementing interventions where winners and losers are created. An intervention that creates winners who become profitable businesses faces the danger of backlash from community members who do not receive benefits. Instead, interventions should consider a whole system and include multiple interventions from multiple players. The need for systemic intervention leads to a question about whether it is possible to facilitate a systemic change that makes markets, especially local markets, accessible to the poor. This is a philosophical question, but theoretically, if markets are a social construct, it is possible to construct them differently. There are a number of theoretical debates to be had about a broader construction of the market economy, but, on a smaller scale, it is a useful starting point for businesses that are attempting to include small, local businesses in their supply chain. Large corporations are able to influence the internal market environment for small businesses. How should we think about constructing the “market” differently to develop an environment that facilitates small business and ensures that enterprise development is a route out of poverty? There are a number of interventions that could be useful, such as the development of co-operative structures. Philip argues that not enough attention has been given to opportunities to co-operate. While the MDA did not achieve success with the establishment of co-operatives, there is an opportunity for small business and farmers to form co-operatives and increase their bargaining power. In addition, large companies could consider how to construct their internal “market” differently. Practical actions, such as reconsidering payment timelines, ring-fencing contracts, and interventions to improve cash flow could make a significant difference to SMMEs. In addition, a clear strategy around the types of contracts that could be ring-fenced would provide a starting point for small businesses. When applying these kinds of interventions, it is important to ensure they truly meet the needs of SMME owners and are part of broader, specific, interventions. While SMME development in SA has faced certain challenges, small businesses could provide a real avenue for job creation and benefit sharing. Markets on the Margins provides useful pointers for improvement to current enterprise development approaches. • Schultz is a consultant at Synergy Global. She writes in her personal capacity.