A planned strike by SA Revenue Service (Sars) workers is likely to go ahead on Thursday after unions rejected the tax agency’s final wage offer presented at a meeting on Tuesday evening.  A strike at Sars would affect customs as well as walk-in branches a day ahead of the deadline for South Africans to pay taxes due to the embattled tax agency. Sars said it has  put  contingency measures in place and has since activated plans to have minimal disruption to taxpayer services across Sars branches and ports of entries in the event the Public Servants Association (PSA) and National Education, Health and Allied Workers’ Union (Nehawu) proceeded with the strike. It also on Tuesday applied to the Commission for Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration (CCMA) for an intervention in terms of the Labour Relations Act  in an attempt to mediate the dispute. Sars had met Nehawu and the PSA on Tuesday evening in a bid to break the deadlock on the salary and benefit negotiations. Nehawu said ahead of the meeting that it would go on strike, while the PSA said it would first wait to see what Sars placed on the table. The unions had asked for, among others, an 11.4% increase for a one year term only, instead of going into a multiterm agreement. Sars, however, said on Wednesday morning that both unions had rejected its offer  including an agreement on an 8% increase in year one, with CPI plus 1% increases for year two and three of the agreement. The settlement offer also included the tax agency acceding to pre-natal leave, long-service increases and the status quo on other leave demands. Sars said it had told the unions that for it to have reprioritised its expenditure for an 8% increase, a multiterm agreement was essential to create a level of financial certainty for the organisation, as well as the time needed to close on the savings that the organisation will need to make. It said the multiterm agreement would provide stability over the medium term, which would be conducive for Sars to focus on key improvements to take the organisation forward. “Organised labour, unfortunately, rejected Sars’s settlement offer without offering an alternative viable counter-proposal,” the tax agency said. This has now led to Sars going back to its previous offer of a 7% increase for a single term. "However, if organised labour consulted their members and they accept the offer of 8% across the board, and CPI plus 1% in subsequent years, the dispute will be resolved,” Sars said. mailovichc@businesslive.co.za