The technical review panel appointed by public enterprises minister Pravin Gordhan and the Eskom board earlier this month to review the functioning of  power stations will finish some of its work by early next week and will have some preliminary results. The Cabinet said in a statement on Friday following its meeting on Wednesday that these preliminary findings will assist Eskom and the government “to put in place a more rigorous programme of power-plant maintenance that will help stabilise the generation system over the next few weeks and months”. The 11-person technical review team investigated the operations, maintenance and technical environment at the ailing utility’s power stations, including Medupi and Kusile. Medupi, in particular, has been hobbled by design faults and delays. The team was appointed following persistent load-shedding due to the lack of sufficient electricity to meet demand. It examined plant unavailability due to scheduled maintenance and   due to unplanned outages and unscheduled maintenance; operator errors, resulting in power plants tripping and shutting down; and technical- and operator-associated inefficiencies resulting in lower than optimum electricity output from the power station units. The technical team is made up of industry specialists including academic, engineering and power-systems professionals. The team is led by two co-ordinators, Tsakani Mthombeni and Ian Morrison. The other nine members of the technical review team are: Seeralan Chinaboo, Khumo Morolo, Gladman Mkwai, Robbie van Heerden, Sibuyela Sishuba, Walter Schmitz, Vitesh Maharaj, Lwazi Goqwana and Phindile Mooketsi. The Cabinet noted that electricity generation had been stable this week with a low risk of load-shedding. “However, there are still a high number of unplanned outages that create a disruptive effect on the overall system,” it said. Deputy president David Mabuza reported to Cabinet on developments regarding Eskom and electricity constraints. “Good progress has since been made in acquiring sufficient coal and diesel supplies, and with water reserves at pumped storage stations at hydro-electricity plants,” the statement said. The Cabinet also dealt with the financial situation of Eskom and said that further options are being considered to support the power utility. ensorl@businesslive.co.za