It makes good sense to encourage President Cyril Ramaphosa — or anyone else — to do the right thing, but voting for the ANC on May 8 after their poor performance over the past 25 years will only encourage them to do more of the same. Most political parties change their attitudes and policies when they lose support, not when they retain or increase their support and the ANC is no different. What will force Ramaphosa and the ANC to change is their support dropping substantially. Here are five good reasons why the ANC does not deserve support: 1. Corruption did not start with Jacob Zuma. Sarafina, the arms deal, the improper enrichment of the ANC’s Chancellor House front company and the dismantling of the Scorpions all took place before Zuma’s presidency. 2. The Eskom debacle did not start with Zuma. Twenty years ago, the ANC government refused to heed warnings that SA would run out of electricity before 2009 if immediate action was not taken, and inappropriate affirmative action policies resulted in a disastrous loss of technical staff rendering Eskom incapable of functioning efficiently. 3. State capture did not start with Zuma. The ANC has a formal resolution, adopted at its National Conference in 1997, specifically calling for the deployment of ANC cadres at all spheres of government and in all state institutions, including the judiciary. 4. The appalling state of our public schools did not start with Zuma. Bad policies were applied, such as the attempted implementation of outcomes-based education, the closure of teacher training colleges and the voluntary severance packages given to senior educationists in the late 1990s, and the never-ending kowtowing to the demands of the SA Democratic Teachers Union just made matters worse. 5. The missed economic opportunities did not start with Zuma. Despite the commendable efforts of the National Treasury, successive ANC governments’ insistence on adhering to unsuitable economic policies have resulted in inadequate fixed investment, low growth and dangerously high unemployment. On average, South Africans are now getting poorer each year and it is the poorest sections of our people that are suffering most. Unless we can get economic growth of at least 4% to 6%, we are in very serious trouble. Corruption and state capture need to be dealt with, but without a dramatic change in ANC economic policy, things will only get worse. Edge of a precipice Many of these problems were exacerbated during Zuma’s presidency, but they were already there when he took over and remain in place today as ANC policies and practice. SA is on the edge of a precipice. What is needed are some fundamental changes and this will happen only if the ANC loses substantial support in the May general elections. If the ANC maintains most of its support, it will be business as usual in most respects. A significant reduction in electoral support for the ANC would strengthen Ramaphosa’s hand if he really wants to bring about the changes that are necessary. Important as they are, it is not just about corruption and Zupta-led state capture; it is about the poor policies and practices of successive ANC governments. Ramaphosa’s future depends on the ANC’s National Executive Committee (many of whom should be in prison), which remains in place until 2022 and will not change irrespective of the outcome of the 2019 general election or the size or composition of the ANC’s parliamentary caucus. SA is in a parlous state right now. Dramatic changes are required if we are, at best, not to be trapped in a quagmire of diminishing standards of living and rising discontent and unrest or, worse, become a failed state such as Zimbabwe or Venezuela. Every voter needs to think hard about what is best for our country and not rely on emotional or historical attachments. This is no time for prevarication or myopia. As Aldous Huxley wrote: “Facts do not cease to exist because they are ignored.” • Andrew, a former DA shadow finance minister, was the first chair of parliament's standing committee on public accounts (Scopa) after the advent of democracy.