President Cyril Ramaphosa says he will wait for the state-capture inquiry to conclude its work and final report before taking action against cabinet members implicated in corrupt dealings. Some of the cabinet members implicated during recent testimony at the inquiry include environmental affairs minister Nomvula Mokonyane, and Gwede Mantashe, who leads the mineral resources portfolio. In a written reply from a question from IFP MP Mkhuleko Hlengwa, which was published on Friday, Ramaphosa said he will await the report of the commission before determining what action needs to be taken, including against any members of  the cabinet that may be implicated in the report. Hlengwa had asked the president whether he will take action against Mokonyane, Mantashe, and the deputy minister of justice and correctional services Thabang Makwetla, who are all implicated through allegations in testimony given at the inquiry. Ramaphosa said “nothing prevents the relevant authorities within the criminal justice system from investigating allegations of impropriety by ministers or any other persons. In any such instances, legal processes must be allowed to be concluded with due regard for the rule of law”. The president has been under pressure to sack ministers implicated in testimony at the ongoing commission of inquiry looking into state capture. In his damning testimony, Angelo Agrizzi, former COO at facilities firm Bosasa, which is accused of  corruption, implicated ministers, former and current ANC MPs, and officials working in various departments. Agrizzi detailed how Bosasa, now trading as African Global Operations, paid out millions of rands in bribes every month to secure tenders at state institutions. Agrizzi also implicated the ANC itself, stating that about R1.8m was paid to the party for its election campaign in the North West five years ago. He said about 80 people were on Bosasa’s list of people it paid bribes to monthly. The company recently applied for voluntary liquidation following the closing of its bank accounts by FNB and Absa banks. The two banks cited reputational risk as their reason for cutting ties with the firm after it was implicated in corrupt activities at the  inquiry. phakathib@businesslive.co.za