Private education group AdvTech says its performance in SA continues to be negatively affected by financial pressure on parents, as well as emigration. The education conglomerate is eyeing further expansion in faster-growing African economies to offset difficult conditions in SA. The group’s student base grew 11% in the year to end-December, but the company noted this was primarily due to its expansion strategy. Tough trading conditions had prompted a drop-off of upfront fee payments from parents, who were also increasingly delaying payments. The results were somewhat lacklustre, and enrolment growth had been  subdued for both AdvTech and its rival Curro over the past 18 months, said Mergence Investment Managers equity analyst Nolwandle Mthombeni. “While management may cite investment and emigration as part of the reason the schools' division is underperforming, a turnaround is overdue as a lot of investment has been made to grow capacity, and returns need to start coming through,” said Mthombeni. AdvTech said on Monday that operating profit in the year to end-December rose a healthy 14% to R763m,  boosted by a strong performance by the group’s tertiary operations. Operating profit from its university segment grew 23% to R395m and group revenue 11% to R4.4bn to end-December. Operating profit from its schools' division inched up 1% year on year. The company decreased its dividend 12% to 30c compared with the corresponding period in 2017, noting that it was seeking to preserve cash due to its expansion strategy. Capital commitments amount to R1.9bn, and will largely be funded by way of additional debt, the company said. The hefty capital commitment is for the group’s proposed acquisition of Monash SA. The acquisition still requires regulatory approval, but is expected to take effect in April. Acquisitions during the 2018 financial year included 71% of Kenya’s Makini group of eight schools with 3,200 students for R111.5m. The company said enrolment growth was largely as a result of the company entering faster-growing economies in Africa. To end-December, group enrolment grew 11% year on year. Tertiary enrolment grew 10% and enrolment in its school segment 12%. The company also opened three new campuses in 2018, including digitally enabled Rosebank College. The Rosebank College portfolio now consists of mega campuses in Johannesburg, Pretoria and Durban. A  mega campus is in the pipeline for Cape Town in 2020, the company said. At 11am on Monday, AdvTech’s share price was down 0.96%, having given up 17.87% so far in 2019. gernetzkyk@businesslive.co.za