A guy I know told me the other day that the first time we met I was lying in mud, cursing up a blue streak. It was on a Friday near the end of March seven years ago. It was stage five of the 2012 Absa Cape Epic and I had crashed. And I was mad as hell. It was a stupid crash. There are no clever crashes. They are all daft. It wasn’t the first time I had crashed on that Epic, but it was the last. And it was the stupidest of them all. It had been a brute of a day. Overnight rain made the 119km from Caledon to Oak Valley a mudfest. As temperatures dropped, we prayed that they would shorten the stage, but instead they extended the cut-off time so we had longer to suffer. We were about a kilometre from the finish, grinding through the mud. My partner on Team Absa JackMac, Jack Stroucken, was a little in front of me. I decided to jump on the side of the path, thinking it was dryer. It wasn’t, and the tree that was close to the side decided to give me a shove. I fell over gently, getting in five curses on the way down. Jack kept riding and smiling. Jack is a gentle, composed man, not given to harsh words. I had cursed my way around the Epic. We Irish are world champion cursers, and I was in the form of my life. Jack knew that if I was cursing, then I was okay. There have been more than just a few crashes in this year’s Epic. Sam Gaze, the New Zealander, went down hard early in the week and has had to pull out. I never thought about stopping in 2012. It was the Epic. I couldn’t stop. There were some who never thought I would get through. I know of one pro rider who bet against me. I probably wasn’t sure myself that I would get through. The Epic is a beast. It tries to break you, then embrace you and then, when you think you have it dialled, it tries to break you again. That’s why I’ve been watching it on SuperSport and live streaming all week, following people I know via live tracking on the website, cheering every time they pass through a waterpoint, and clapping when they get in before cut-off. Every day is full of mini battles and victories and losses. Every ridiculous climb up a mountain and every even more ridiculous blitz down a hill. I have a weird relationship with the race. A guy called Kevin Vermaak came to see me in 2002 or 2003 to tell me about this race he had planned. He showed me a PowerPoint presentation. I liked it. Vermaak said I should ride it one day. I said I just might. I did it as part of Team Absa, a media-celebrity team. There was Joel Stransky, Vanessa Haywood, Elana Meyer and Nico Panagiotopoulos. I didn’t know who Panagiotopoulos was back then. I do now. I watched Elana have a stupid crash as we rocked and rolled down a hill on stage one. Elana could smash up a hill like no-one’s business, spinning at an incredible cadence, but she and the technical stuff weren’t friends. Her front tyre hit a rock and bounced, kicking her wheel sideways. She bounced left, then right and then came down hard. I stopped to pick her up. She had damaged her elbow and was sobbing. I hugged her until Ernst Viljoen, her partner, came back up the road to assist her. I told her it would be alright, that we would both finish. Just before the last waterpoint, I hit a dropped bottle disguised by dirt and came down hard on my right side, my head helmet smashing into the ground. I limped into the waterpoint at the Van Loveren wine estate. Later, I found that my helmet was broken and I had a cut in my knee. Elana and I sat together in the medical room, her for a stitch and me for a clean-up. We laughed. What the hell are we doing this race for? Because it was there. Because it was stupid and it was amazing. Because it was the Absa Cape Epic.