African Rainbow Minerals (ARM) reported a slip in interim profit because of a hefty impairment against its struggling Nkomati Nickel mine, which needs a cash injection. ARM, a diversified mining company chaired by billionaire Patrice Motsepe, reported a post-tax profit of R1.496bn for the six months to end-December against a profit of R1.89bn a year earlier. Included in the numbers is an impairment of R1.166bn against the unprofitable Nkomati mine. Nkomati is shared by ARM and Russian nickel and palladium miner Norilsk Nickel, which has, for years, wanted to sell its stake in the operation. It tried unsuccessfully to conclude a deal with Botswana’s state-owned BCL. Nkomati reported a headline loss of R186m in the period because of lower nickel and chrome sales. “ARM has completed its review, given the mine’s operational challenges, cash support that could be required from the partners, and the relatively limited [eight-year] life of the open pit mine,” it said. “Part of this review indicates a decline in head grade, resulting in decreased metal output, the mine’s inability to generate sufficient cash to meet operational requirements, and an increase in production costs. We are in discussions with our partner on the future of the mine.” Given ARM’s history of disposing unprofitable assets, such as its Lubambe copper mine, which it sold at the end of 2017, the future of Nkomati in the company is not certain. Nkomati’s nickel production fell by 2% to 6,624 tonnes because of the low-grade stockpiled material the operation treated during the interim period. ARM declared an interim dividend of 400c per share compared to a 250c interim payment a year earlier. It had net cash of R1.17bn by the end of December, a swing from a net debt position of R1.1bn a year earlier. ARM had R3.297bn of cash on its balance sheet at the end of the reporting period and was paid a R1.5bn dividend from Assmang, an unlisted joint venture company it shares with JSE-listed Assore. At the end of the 2018 financial year in June, ARM had cash of R3.291bn. Elsewhere in ARM, the stand-out performances were from iron ore, manganese mines in Assmang, and the Modikwa platinum mine. Out of headline earnings of R2.2bn for the period, which were 13% higher than a year earlier, the biggest contributions came from iron ore and manganese, which generated R2.13bn of headline earnings, a 21% improvement. The increase came from higher prices. Modikwa’s headline earnings more than quadrupled to R173m. However, the ARM platinum division, which includes Nkomati and the Two Rivers mine, reported a 26% fall in headline earnings to R167m, with the nickel business’s R186m loss weighing heavily on the performance of the two platinum mines. The coal unit reported a 59% fall in headline earnings to R65m. seccombea@bdfm.co.za