Earlier this week, #AmINext flooded social media as women in SA drew attention to the magnitude of gender-based sexual violence, rape and murder taking place throughout the country. The hashtag was shared in response to the rape and murder of 19-year-old UCT student Uyinene Mrwetyana, allegedly by an SA Post Office employee. This follows the global #MeToo campaign that went viral after the allegations against Hollywood producer Harvey Weinstein, who is accused of using his position of power for decades to harass and sexually assault women. Gender-based sexual violence is an issue requiring systemic transformation, which can be greatly influenced or hindered by our various social structures. A crucial structure for such change is the workplace. In the face of this widespread pattern of abuse and efforts by SA citizens to pressure parliament into declaring gender-based sexual violence a national state of emergency, employers are urged to actively address gender-based sexual violence in the workplace. This is necessary in circumstances where an employee has perpetrated, or continues to perpetrate, violence or harassment against a fellow employee, or where an employee has been made a victim of harassment or violence (inside or outside the workplace). SA law prohibits any form of sexual harassment or violence in the workplace. It is a form of unfair discrimination on the basis of sex, gender and/or sexual orientation and has been described by the labour appeal court as “the most heinous misconduct that plagues a workplace”. An employer that does not address allegations of sexual harassment or violence in the workplace may be deemed to have contravened the Employment Equity Act (EEA) by virtue of the perpetrator having contravened the EEA by committing sexual harassment or violence; and the employer failing to take the necessary steps to eliminate the sexual harassment or violence. Consequently, the employer may be liable to pay damages or compensation to the victim. A complainant may also institute a delictual claim against the employer for damages on the basis of the employer’s vicarious liability for the perpetrator’s actions as an employee. Costs of gender-based sexual violence Extended unforeseen absenteeism, interrupted job performance, a despondent workforce, loss of valued employees and reputational damage are some examples of the costs that employers bear as a direct result of gender-based sexual violence. In conjunction with what the law requires, employers should give serious consideration to vigorously taking further steps to eliminate and prevent gender-based sexual violence in their workplace. These may include: Ultimately, the most effective way to eliminate gender-based sexual violence from the workplace is for all individuals to be actively involved, and become part of the solution. In fact, the workplace can be a powerful structure for much-needed social benefit, providing information, education, support and other vital resources that employees may not otherwise get. • Mather is a senior associate at Bowmans and Raphulu a partner and head of Bowmans’ employment and benefits practice