It is much easier to “experiment”, test and iterate  policy ideas when the economy is doing well. It is an entirely different undertaking when output isn’t growing, large swathes of your population are out of work and your municipalities, utilities and other delivery mechanisms don’t deliver. In such a context, the pressure for policy to deliver on intended outcomes is ever greater, and so are the social and economic costs of failure. The  Treasury last Tuesday delivered a paper, or discussion document, outlining some of the structural changes required to get our economy on a better footing. If it were an essay written by one of my students, it would receive a C minus. The document flagged all the issues and referenced the necessary scholars across the ideological spectrum but failed to be an exposition of difficult trade-offs and distinct choices. In some cases it does offer direction, but this is often provided in areas that the location of the Treasury within the government makes  politically difficult. To just assess the merits of the ideas in the document is OK, but policy requires the ability to also dabble in politics as the “art of the impossible”; to ask questions of what is “politically” feasible within the social, economic and political constraints that exist. The manner in which the document was developed, prepared and disseminated does more to reduce the potency of some of its better ideas in an eclectic mix than any of its intellectual sparring partners on the other side of the ideological divide. Politically, this was an own goal or, as Gwede Mantashe suggested, “a mistake” for a Treasury long touted as a super ministry and the barons overlording macroeconomic policy. What the document did was to wade into the territory of other ministries, criticise or restructure their tools and much like with budgets suggest the policy parameters within which these ministries can contribute to the structural economic transformation required. Many of them will not take kindly to this. Aside from Mantashe’s arena of mineral and energy policy, the document’s overzealous support for a larger role for renewables in the energy mix is not scandalous. What is, is what that support is framed alongside, a potential fire-sale of state-owned coal power stations. How is that call made, and who makes it? On industrial policy, the document dabbles in a debate where ideally (least not publicly) it shouldn’t be shouting from the rooftops: the suitability of the sectoral choices in the Industrial Policy Action Plan. This is an unhelpful debate, especially in a context where we are trying to keep the existing manufacturing jobs we have. What becomes of the short-run employment and output response of reducing support to sectors the Treasury sees as undeserving? On what basis is that determination made? I must commend the Treasury for dedicating time to share the thoughts of its economic policy unit. Ideas matter. It also matters to put  them to the test. But to do so often does not require going out on a limb, when we know that information has material market and welfare outcomes. It is the last thing you want to hear in a crisis that we are still in a contemplative arena, in a context where  structural decisions and resources have been lent to prior decisions. In isiXhosa, our people often ask, ‘sise eysize komkhulu?’, the direct translation is “which version of events should we take to the palace of the king/chief?” However, in context, the turn of phrase is often used to ask which of varying versions should be taken as the direction, that in this case, our government will assume. Everyone wants to know. The Treasury is not a Braamfontein-based NGO that can issue discussion documents without those being seen as a definitive view, if not a first salvo in the articulation of the sixth administration’s economic thinking. What our people, those we work, invest and live alongside, want to hear is that there is a clear plan, with clear initiatives, timelines and actions; with enough political credibility to pull different departments, stakeholders, functions and resources in one direction. This discussion document didn’t achieve that. And maybe that wasn’t its aim. Its aim may have been to stamp some ideational authority over the economic designs of the “new dawn”. Only time will tell if that authority is enough to get us out of this mess. • Cawe (@aycawe), a development economist, is MD of Xesibe Holdings and hosts MetroFMTalk on Metro FM.