Reporting to: Companies editor/editor Department: Editorial Location: Johannesburg Position overview Business Day and the Financial Mail are looking for a Finance and Business Writer, focusing on the financial services sector. We’re seeking an applicant with a track record of news, analysis and sharp analytical pieces. Storytelling, scoops and the pursuit of ambitious stories are encouraged. Applicants should have a demonstrated knowledge of business and finance and be able to drive day-to-day coverage, company earnings, fast-moving breaking news and enterprise stories. The successful candidate will provide content for both print and online, and must be an active participant on social media, or at least demonstrate a working knowledge of digital platforms. Main responsibilities Minimum qualifications and requirements Personal skills/attributes Qualified applicants may submit their CV, cover letter, three writing samples and two references to Managing Editor Kevin O’Grady at ogradyk@businesslive.co.za Closing date: November 30 2019 Tiso Blackstar Group is an affirmative action employer and preference will be given to candidates who will add to the diversity of our organisation. Should we not respond to you in the next 21 days, you may regard your application as unsuccessful. Reporting to: Editors, Business Day and Financial Mail Department: Editorial Location: Johannesburg Position overview The Business Day and Financial Mail are looking to hire an energetic and creative individual to write about investments. We're looking for someone who has a solid track record in business journalism, who will work well in a team, and is able to work across platforms and the two titles. The ideal candidate would feel as comfortable writing about the impact of the three new banks — Discovery, Bank Zero and Tyme — on the incumbent banks, as they would about what went wrong at Steinhoff or EOH. He or she would be able to break stories, provide analysis of trends and events, and be able to prioritise well to discern which stories are worth pursuing, and which aren't. Main responsibilities Minimum qualifications and requirements Qualified applicants may submit their CV, cover letter and references to Managing Editor Kevin O’Grady at ogradyk@businesslive.co.za Closing date: November 30 2019 Tiso Blackstar Group is an affirmative action employer and preference will be given to candidates who will add to the diversity of our organisation. Should we not respond to you in the next 21 days, you may regard your application as unsuccessful. Reporting to: Markets editor Department: Editorial Location: Johannesburg Position overview Business Day and BusinessLIVE are looking for a markets writer. We’re seeking an applicant with a track record of writing news and analysis. Speed and accuracy are essential. The successful candidate must have an understanding of and the ability to write routine markets stories on currencies, bonds and stocks. They must also have an understanding of the principles of economics, knowledge of the stocks listed on the JSE, an understanding of the relationships between different financial instruments, and be able to interpret companies’ financial statements. They must be able to drive day-to-day coverage, company earnings, fast-moving breaking news and enterprise stories. The successful candidate will provide content for both print and online. Main responsibilities Minimum qualifications and requirements Competencies Qualified applicants may submit their CV, cover letter, three writing samples and two references to Managing Editor Kevin O’Grady at ogradyk@businesslive.co.za Closing date: November 8 2019 Tiso Blackstar Group is an affirmative action employer and preference will be given to candidates who will add to the diversity of our organisation. Should we not respond to you in the next 21 days, you may regard your application as unsuccessful.