Cell C’s R8.9bn debt burden has been cited as one of the factors behind the slump in the shares of its largest investor Blue Label Telecoms in 2019 — yet the mobile operator’s bonds have staged a big comeback. The yield on Cell C’s dollar note due in August 2020 has fallen to 11.6% from 16.8% in early January. Lower yields show higher demand and pricing. The yield on a longer-dated bond due in August 2022, issued by related party 3C Telecommunications, has fallen to 15.5% from 21.4% in late December. But at the same time, shares in Cell C’s largest investor, 45% owner Blue Label, have fallen out of favour. The group’s stock has retreated by as much as a third in the year to date, partly on concerns that Cell C is carrying too much debt. The sharp decline in yields on Cell C’s debt could be explained by lower government bond yields globally, which “normally pull down corporate bonds also”, said Mergence Investment Managers portfolio manager Peter Takaendesa. The yield on the R208 government note due on March 31 2021, was at 6.88% on Thursday, down from a 2019 high of 7.2% in February. The longer-dated R186 bond has also strengthened, with yields decreasing to 8.5% from 8.9% in the middle of February. Takaendesa said it is also possible “that bond investors have a different view to equity investors”. He added that Blue Label’s shareholders may be concerned that their stakes will be diluted, particularly if Cell C’s mooted recapitalisation deal is done at lower valuations. In February, Blue Label said a consortium of investors, led by billionaire businessman Jonathan Beare, had agreed to take a minority stake in the heavily indebted mobile operator to bolster its balance sheet. The deal is yet to be finalised. At the end of November, Cell C had loans and borrowings worth R8.9bn. In comparison, Blue Label’s market capitalisation was  R3.3bn. The mobile operator’s net finance costs amounted to R1.8bn, excluding finance leases, in the six months to November 2018. Imtiaz Suliman, portfolio manager at Sentio Capital, said the recovery of Cell C’s bonds might be explained by them being callable within the next month at par value. A callable bond can be redeemed by the issuer before it matures. “They could also have rallied on the back of news that Cell C will be able to refinance these bonds at a better level than the current 11% in dollars. Dollar funding is very expensive and they might have secured a line of local funding at better rates,” Suliman said. On Wednesday, Vestact CEO Paul Theron wrote in a note to clients that government bond yields “are in great demand ... Bonds issued by the most established economies are trading at levels where they offer very low yields.” German 10-year bond yields recently fell below zero for the first time since 2016, while US 10-year bond yields are at about 2.5%. “Despite being a country in a part of the world hard to find on a map, Tajikistan’s $500m bond offering in 2017 received $4bn worth of bids, which was eight times more than it offered … That was with a credit rating well below investment grade and absolutely no track record,” Theron said. “When you consider the bigger picture, perhaps it’s no wonder Moody’s kept SA’s credit rating unchanged … Investors want to own them anyway.” hedleyn@businesslive.co.za