Nissan’s announcement of a R3bn investment in its SA vehicle manufacturing operation is a “clear and unambiguous signal” of foreign investor confidence in SA’s economic renewal, President Cyril Ramaphosa said on Wednesday. He was speaking at the company’s Rosslyn, Pretoria plant after Nissan SA MD Mike Whitfield announced the investment to build the Navara pick-up from 2020. Whitfield said the intention is to build about 30,000 Navaras annually, almost doubling current Rosslyn production of about 35,000. Rosslyn will continue to build its two existing pick-ups, the Hardbody one-tonner and smaller NP200, for the foreseeable future. Peyman Kargar, head of the international Nissan group’s Africa and Middle East operations, said the plant could eventually build vehicles for Renault and Mitsubishi, Nissan’s partners in a global alliance. Besides being directed at the SA market, where pick-ups — or bakkies — are very popular, the Navara is also intended to spearhead Nissan SA’s export push, particularly in Sub-Saharan Africa, where the company sells vehicles into more than 40 countries. However, sales for all brands have shrunk across the region in recent years and Whitfield hopes the Navara will also find markets in Europe, where SA-built Ford and Toyota pick-ups already enjoy a strong presence. Nissan SA expects Navara production to start in the fourth quarter of 2020. Whitfield said the additional production volumes, which will require Rosslyn to add a second daily shift, will create about 400 jobs in the plant and 800 at parts suppliers. Rosslyn will be one of six plants around the world building the Navara. The version to be built in SA from next year will be the mid-generation, facelifted version of a model launched internationally in 2014 and sold in SA as an import. Kargar said the investment is in response to the government’s decision to extend the motor industry’s strategic plan, the Automotive Production and Development Programme (APDP), beyond its original 2020 limit and make it part of a broader automotive strategy running to 2035. “Consistent policy is helpful,” he said. “The motor industry is not a short-term industry.” Several other multinational motor companies have committed to further SA investments in conjunction with the extended APDP. Whitfield said the R3bn investment will result in modernisation of the Rosslyn plant, including a new, flexible production line, and provide further training and skilling of staff.