Building materials supplier Afrimat has offered to buy Australia-listed Universal Coal for up to A$209m (R2.1bn). The nonbinding indicative offer, for all of Universal’s 522-million shares, was in line with Afrimat’s strategy to diversify, it said. Universal, a coal miner listed on the Australian stock exchange, operates in SA. Afrimat, headed by Andries van Heerden, said it offered a maximum purchase price of A$0.40 for each Universal share. It was considering “various financing alternatives” for the proposed deal. Universal’s shares surged 14.7% to a high of A$0.39 on Monday. The company said it had also received a revised takeover offer from a consortium led by SA’s Ata Resources. Among other considerations, the consortium, which included Wescoal, had raised its offer from A$0.35 to A$0.36 per Universal share. However, Wescoal said in a statement on Monday that the consortium had given up on the deal. That leaves Afrimat, whose diversification strategy has helped it through a difficult period, as the sole bidder. In November 2018, the group reported a 9% drop in first-half headline earnings per share (HEPS) to 94c. The company said at the time that its construction materials cluster felt the effect of the slowdown in economic activity in the six months to end-August, although bulk commodities and industrial minerals provided a cushion. Those units both fared better, save for Lyttelton dolomite mine, which was affected by the slowdown in the construction sector. Afrimat’s shares were 1.6% up at R31 in early trade — close to their record high of R31.75. Independent analyst Anthony Clark, who rates the company a “buy”, said Afrimat's move into the coal sector was “no surprise”. “This will be Afrimat’s biggest-ever deal and so expect a hefty rights issue to come to fund it,” Clark said. Given that Universal generated healthy profits, the deal could “catapult Afrimat's earnings. I see this deal as the latest that Afrimat will undertake to expand and diversify its portfolio away from construction materials to give a better-balanced business”. The deal appeared “well worth supporting — Universal seems like a great prospect”. hedleyn@businesslive.co.za