There is a pattern to all tragedies such as the Holocaust and similar genocides. An all-too-typical slippery slope starts with an initial malignant mindset followed by a series of steps that follow inevitably. The first step is to dehumanise and demonise people the perpetrator wishes to destroy. In his book Hitler’s Willing Executioners, Daniel Goldhagen, an associate professor of government and sociology at Harvard University, examines in depth how it was possible for citizens  — let alone members of vigilante and paramilitary organisations — to perpetrate unthinkable cruelties on innocent victims. His conclusion is that the perpetrator started by dehumanising and demonising the victims. There is a story told that a little boy was walking with his mother in Munich near the Dachau concentration camp. They saw concentration camp prisoners walking under guard to do slave labour. The little boy asked his mother “who are those people?”, and she replied “they are not people”. Dehumanisation and demonisation are achieved by sustained and sophisticated propaganda and hate speech. The third step is the passing of ongoing discriminatory laws reviling and disqualifying the victims. The fourth step is imprisonment and concentration camps. The final step is extermination, by gas chamber or other foul means. Regrettably,  the phenomenon of institutional discrimination has occurred in our own country, as manifested by the infamous apartheid laws. Former president Nelson Mandela, in his inauguration speech delivered on May 10 1994, made his famous remark: “Never again.” That too is our imperative. “Never again.” The significance of the opening of the Johannesburg Holocaust and Genocide Centre is much more than just the building, as impressive as it may be. Its symbolic value far transcends the material structure. That symbolic value is in itself multifaceted. Centres such as this are erected  to pay tribute to the memory of all the victims, those who perished and those who survived, in such dastardly events as the Holocaust, genocides and all similar events. The centre is a memorial to the victims who were subjected to such horrendous persecution. Centres of this nature also  contribute to the prevention of a recurrence of such shocking persecutions. The centre is a symbolic beacon, but the works that will take place within its walls, all its activities and educative and advocacy roles, will help ensure the “never again”. SA has a wonderful constitution designed to underpin fundamental human rights. This merits the observation that there is a fine tension between freedom of expression and hate speech. We need to be careful about permitting blatant hate speech masquerading under the cloak of freedom of expression. Incredibly, barely 70 years after the Holocaust, rampant anti-semitism is on the march worldwide, as is the Holocaust denial that is but a manifestation of antisemitism. Regrettably, other forms of racial hatred are also blossoming in other parts of the world. Hate speech is pernicious — it matters not who the victim is. The lesson of the Holocaust and genocide is that discrimination flourishes when good people remain silent.  Martin Luther King Junior stated: “In the end, we will remember not the words of our enemies, but the silence of our friends.” Pastor Friedrich Gustav Emil Martin Niemoller said: “First they came for the communists, and I did not speak out — because I was not a communist; then they came for the trade unionists, and I did not speak out — because I was not a trade unionist; then they came for the Jews, and I did not speak out — because I was not a Jew; then they came for me — and there was no-one left to speak  for me.” In the words of author, academic, Nobel laureate and Holocaust survivor Elie Wiesel: “We must take sides. Neutrality helps the oppressor, never the victim. Silence encourages the tormentor, never the tormented. Sometimes we must interfere when human lives are endangered, when human dignity is in jeopardy. National borders and sensitivities become irrelevant whenever men and women are persecuted because of their race, religion, or political views, that place must — at that moment — become the centre of the universe.” • Katz is ENSafrica chair. This is an adaptation of his speech at the March 17 opening of the Johannesburg Holocaust and Genocide Centre, which he also chairs.