Intu Properties, which was formed when Donald Gordon’s UK real estate group Liberty International was split in 2010, has finally announced a replacement for its long-standing CEO David Fischel, who leaves the company after 18 years in the role. Matthew Roberts, its finance chief since 2010, will take over as CEO of the UK and Spanish mall owner at the end of April 2019. This comes after a prolonged search for a replacement for Fischel, who resigned at the end of July 2018. Fischel had been expected to leave at the end of December, having been CEO since 2001 and worked at the group since 1985. He stayed on however as acting CEO while Intu looked  for a replacement. Intu has faced serious challenges over the past few years, including its tenants having to compete with growing online retail with a number of them closing shop or entering administration. Uncertainty around how the UK will leave the EU has led to Intu’s UK malls be devalued. One analyst was surprised an internal candidate was chosen. “After such a long wait, the market expected an outsider to take over the job,” said Keillen Ndlovu head of listed property funds at Stanlib. Intu said Roberts was well-placed to improve the company’s fortunes and that he understood the strengths and weaknesses of the group. “The board has appointed Matthew following a rigorous search process which included a number of first-class internal and external candidates,” Intu said. Roberts, a former Debenhams finance director, takes over at a difficult time for the UK’s mall owners, with online shopping surging  in recent years and consumer confidence dented by uncertainties around Brexit.  Intu’s shares have declined by 75.48% since reaching a high November 2015, with the stock closing at R19.36 on Thursday. The group plans to reduce its debt-to-assets ratio to below 50% through disposals, part-disposals and by “introducing partners to assets”. Roberts said he would also make Intu’s centres more relevant to consumers. “Retail is constantly evolving and we need to improve and change tenant mixes at some of our malls. We will also sell certain UK and or Spanish malls so we can better use the capital we receive afterward,” he said. The company said he had a “strong track record at Intu of successfully recycling capital, with over £1bn (R18.7bn) of assets having been sold since he joined”. The group, which has assets worth £9bn, said Fischel “has played a major role in Intu becoming the UK’s leading owner, developer and manager of large-scale regional shopping centres”. A formal process to recruit a new CFO “will commence imminently”, Intu said. “In the meantime, the position will be filled on a temporary basis from Intu’s finance team under Matthew’s supervision.” Analysts have said Intu may find it a lot easier to sell its Spanish assets as opposed to its UK assets, to help it cut debt. Fund managers have expressed concern that Intu’s debt levels are too high relative to the value of its assets. The group’s loan-to-value ratio (LTV) is as high as 53.1%. Typically SA fund managers prefer listed property funds to have LTVs that lie between 30% and 40%. Garreth Elston, chief investment officer at Rietway Global, said Intu was facing many challenges and was operating in an uncertain environment given how the Brexit process, where the UK will leave the EU, had not been defined nearly three years after the Brexit referendum. “At the moment Intu can only benefit from more stability, and it makes sense to utilise the experience of Mr Roberts.” hedleyn@businesslive.co.za andersona@businesslive.co.za