A multi-award winning Kenyan superhero film that tells the heartwarming story of a terminally ill child obsessed with Jackie Chan movies, who when she returns to her village to live out her remaining time  gets a chance to be a superhero. It’s a clever, funny, human story that  puts the continent on the cinematic map and has plenty to recommend it for  adults and younger viewers alike. Actress Brie Larson makes her directorial debut with this whimsical film about a twenty-something art student who is forced to grow up and face the world, thanks to the help of  interesting friends. It’s a little uneven in  places but  has a strong supporting cast, including Larson’s buddy Samuel L Jackson and oddball favourite Joan Cusack, and proves that Larson has  directorial ability. It’s mostly a charming story about everyone’s inner child and the power of  imagination that’s inoffensive and easy to digest. A grown-up spy thriller set in London in the  aftermath of World War II. This is a slow-burning but intriguing historical account of the battle for Britain and western values in the early days of the Cold War. With excellent performances from Michael Stuhlbarg and Keeley Hawes, it’s a twisty, if not always as thrilling as it should be, take on spies, politics and the fight for values in a changing world. More cloak and dagger in this riveting documentary about one of the 20th century’s possibly greatest secret agents who was virtually unknown until his mysterious death after falling from the balcony of his London apartment in 2007. Ashraf Marwan was an Egyptian millionaire and son-in-law of the country’s president who was outed as one of Israel’s most successful agents shortly before his death. This is his story, told by Mossad agents and Egyptian military members and raising  intriguing questions about Marwan’s shadowy life. A solid, steely-eyed piece of Scandi Noir from the team behind The Bridge, this show centres on a young woman who is arrested after a school shooting. As we travel back to the months before the tragedy we learn that things may not be as clear-cut as they seem and everybody in her seemingly comfortable Stockholm suburb has questions to answer and secrets to hide.