Senior National Prosecuting Authority (NPA) officials Nomgcobo Jiba and Lawrence Mrwebi have until  Tuesday to provide their responses to President Cyril Ramaphosa, on the   findings of an  inquiry that looked into their fitness to hold office. The inquiry, chaired by retired Constitutional Court justice Yvonne Mokgoro, heard six weeks of evidence earlier in 2019. It, among other things, looked at the prosecutorial decisions relating to politically loaded cases, such as the decisions to drop charges against former crime intelligence boss Richard Mdluli and to institute racketeering charges against former KwaZulu-Natal Hawks head Johan Booysen. The  findings of the inquiry will  only be made public after suspended deputy national director of public prosecutions Jiba, and suspended special director of public prosecutions Mrwebi have had an opportunity to consider the report and make representations, which will be looked at by Ramaphosa, the presidency said on Thursday. This followed a meeting between Mokgoro and her co-panelists and Ramaphosa on Wednesday. "The president has shared the report with advocates Jiba and Mrwebi and requested them to submit any representations they may have in response to the findings to the president by Tuesday, April 16," Ramaphosa's spokesperson, Khusela Diko, said. Ramaphosa  established the inquiry in October and both Jiba and Mrwebi were suspended on full pay pending the outcome. Diko said the report was initially submitted on April 1, but that Mokgoro had used the meeting on Wednesday to “present bound copies of the report and the evidence compiled and to answer any questions of clarity the president may have had on the report. The inquiry was seen as part of Ramaphosa's fight against corruption and bid to restore the integrity of the NPA. Former president Jacob Zuma is at the heart of allegations of state capture together with his son, Duduzane Zuma, and his friends, the controversial Gupta family. There have, however, been no prosecutions as allegations of state capture have mounted over the past few years, and the NPA has been seen as being politically influenced for more than a decade. mailovichc@businesslive.co.za