Starting a business requires a great deal more than just passion. SA has one of the highest business start-up failure rates in the world, according to the most recent Global Entrepreneurship Monitor (GEM) report. Unfortunately, many SA small business owners realise too late that a venture can only stay afloat if there are some fundamentals in place. More needs to be done to help businesses survive, especially given how critical they are in the SA context. Paula Barnard, acting head of Sanlam Foundation, says of the small-to-medium enterprise (SME) sector: “This sector is the saving grace for economic reform as government spending will shrink and corporate SA also needs to be agile to compete with international competitive forces. "A vibrant and successful SME sector will create future opportunities for business in terms of catalysing more financial needs to fulfil and increase job creation.” Real-time advice from those in the front line The question is: how can business owners get ahead? Tapping into the experience of those who have defied the odds and built successful businesses is invaluable. Sanlam spoke to a local business to find out how it navigated some tough times along its 25-year journey and managed to turn a struggling business into a thriving player in the car industry, today employing 18 people. Family members Pam, Dougie and Dustin George are co-owners of D&P Auto Works. They’ve been part of the Sanlam Enterprise Supplier Development Programme, which supports the strategic growth and development of SMEs, and here they share their four top tips on being successful business owners.  The reality is that every business is different, but getting the fundamentals right can play a significant role in ensuring a business remains sustainable, despite tough economic times. For business owners, this requires a commitment to applying some tried-and-tested principles to maintain and grow their business. This article was paid for by Sanlam Enterprise and Supplier Development.