Anticipated losses from a contract to upgrade roads in Melbourne's suburbs has prompted Wilson Bayly Holmes-Ovcon (WBHO) to skip an interim dividend. Iress data indicates this is the first time the construction group has not paid an interim dividend since 2003. It maintained its interim dividend at R1.50 in the first half of its 2018 financial year. The group's Australian division, which contributed more than half of the group's revenue for the six months to end-December, posted a R445m operating loss, its results, released on Tuesday morning, showed. “The design and construct project consists of the widening of roads and upgrades to various intersections in suburban Melbourne,” CEO Louwtjie Nel said in the results statement. “The main reason behind the loss recognised relates to interpretation of the technical specification. This interpretation resulted in the underestimation of the physical work required to be performed to meet the output specifications of the contract.” Australia contributed more than half of WBHO's revenue, while its traditional South African building and civil engineering division contributed 20%, and its local roads and earthworks division 13%. In July 2018, WBHO acquired 60% of Manchester-based residential property developer Russells for R572m, along with 31.7% of Russell Homes for R56.4m. Its UK acquisition contributed R2.6bn revenue, helping the overall group grow its top line by 11% to R21.1bn in the first half of its 2019 financial year. Russells contributed R104m profit, which along with the profit from its SA businesses helped WBHO narrowly escape getting dragged into an operating loss by its Australian division. Its interim operating profit was R2.7m, less than 1% of the R510m operating profit in the matching period. WBHO reported net profit of R79m, a fifth of the R404m in the corresponding period. Headline earnings per share similarly fell 80% to 145.6c from 726.8c. “The uncertain South African political and business environment over recent years has had a devastating effect on the local construction industry, particularly over the last 12 months where the sector has faced severe challenges,” Nel said. “The lower levels of private investment, combined with little meaningful public infrastructure spending, have seen increased competition and eroded margins. The failure of various mid-tier contractors together with financial distress within a number of large listed companies have had profound consequences that have extended into the subcontractor market, resulting in significant job losses for the South African workforce," he said. Electus Fund Managers equity analyst Mish-al Emeran said WBHO was making a habit of running into problematic contracts in Australia. "The key disappointment was the losses from the outer suburban arterial roads (Osar) road project in Australia … The rest of the business performed reasonably, but in each of the last few reporting periods there’s been a problem contract in Australia, which is setting a worrying trend," he said. "Management indicate that they believe the full extent of the potential liability related to the Osar project is recognised, but the key risk is that this negative continues," said Emeran.