The Treasury’s commitment to exploring the possibility of introducing a state bank, and President Cyril Ramaphosa’s acknowledgement that banking monopolies are detrimental to the economy, is a welcome development. This devotion to the implementation of an ANC conference resolution has the full support of Cosatu. Workers have been demanding a state bank for a long time, arguing that for thorough economic transformation to become a reality a state bank is necessary. Our idea of a state bank is a financial institution owned and controlled by the government, funded with taxpayer money, and directly accountable to elected officials and the people. The government cannot outsource its developmental agenda to the private sector, and a state bank will form a foundation of a developmental state. It has been proven time and again that large banks want to deal with large customers so  they can make large deals. They prefer the short-term consumption lending that has left many workers trapped in debt. As a result, more than 11-million  credit-active SA consumers have been described as overindebted by the SA Human Rights Commission. According to the  Reserve Bank, consumer debt is  R1.7-trillion, with a study by the World Bank revealing that 25-million SA adults owe money to various financial institutions and corporate lenders. Most South Africans  depend on the urban informal economy, which has been ignored and neglected by the banking sector. The country’s big banks are not held accountable for how they conduct  business. They make decisions that are not developmental and they abuse their hegemony. Regarding the struggling township and rural economies,  money is not necessarily being lent out at reasonable interest rates to fulfil the needs of these businesses. The small businesses are therefore sidelined, yet in terms of  the National Development Plan’s 2030 vision they are the ones that will help  reduce unemployment. Private commercial banks mainly give loans against collateral or security, which ignores the fact that more than 90% of the population has been deprived of land and the right to establish business by colonialism and the apartheid state. A state bank will offer competition to the existing banking system and could be a way to help expose customer abuses and the gouging that is prevalent with these big private banks. It will offer a transparent alternative to the private banks that have been involved in currency manipulation and other reprehensible activities. The state bank will not only protect consumers but also implement sound monetary policy. It will offer lower debt costs to municipalities and provinces, fund public infrastructure projects and encourage entrepreneurship by providing loans to small businesses at lower interest rates and with lower fees. The provinces and municipalities can use the money to build more public housing and support the development of the greener energy infrastructure the country  desperately needs. This will also ensure  the annual interest of about R200bn the government is paying  is directed towards the creation of jobs and building of factories instead of enriching a few creditors. The state will save billions of rand on banking services. Highly indebted A country such as Germany that suffered the devastation of World War 2 has about 70% of bank deposits held by 1,500 regional and local not-for-profit banks. These banks focus on productive lending for productive purposes, helping small businesses expand and grow jobs. Our state bank would also partner with private community banks and co-operative banks to invest in community development projects. In the public service alone about 900,000 workers out of a 1.3-million workforce do not own houses because they do not qualify for housing loans or are already highly indebted. We need a bank with a business and lending approach that will not be driven by greed and will factor developmental imperatives into its activities. Some opponents of a state bank have argued that the recent looting of state-owned entities is reason enough to abandon the idea because it will just be another avenue for corrupt politicians to loot. The idea that we should abandon progressive policies that have the potential to help uplift the poor majority because we have experienced corruption in some state entities is ludicrous. In 2017,  17 banks were allegedly involved in price-fixing and market allocation in the trading of foreign currency pairs involving the rand, according to the Competition Commission. Recent media reports have implicated one of the big four banks in setting interest repayment rates according to race. We did not hear people calling for these banks to be shut down and their banking licences revoked. Post Bank We need to fight corruption in  the public and private sectors, but corruption should not be used to demonise the role of the state in the economy and the objective of a mixed economy. Parliament adopted the Financial Matters Amendment Bill in March 2019 and it now awaits the president’s acquiescence. Workers want this to happen soon, because the bill allows for the state to establish retail banks and will clear the way for the Post Bank to become a more affordable vehicle for social grant recipients, pensioners and the poor. It will also be more accessible for persons living in rural areas who are frequently neglected by commercial banks. Almost all Brics (Brazil, Russia, India, China and SA) countries have state banks. One of the reasons our fiscal and monetary policies have failed most of the population is that there is no state retail bank to complement these policies. Without a state bank, it will not be possible to overcome the legacy of apartheid settlements, land dispossessions, unemployment and poverty. The fact that it is taking so long to establish a state bank indicates the stranglehold the private financial sector has on the state, especially the Treasury and  Reserve Bank. • Ntshalintshali is Cosatu general secretary.