President Cyril Ramaphosa’s legal battle with public protector Busisiwe Mkhwebane gets under way this week. The high court in Pretoria  will on Tuesday hear Ramaphosa’s urgent application to have  implementation of  remedial action in Mkhwebane’s report on Bosasa suspended pending a judicial review. Mkhwebane has found  Ramaphosa deliberately misled parliament when he was asked about a R500,000 donation he received from Gavin Watson,  CEO of the corruption-accused Bosasa. She also found  the president was in breach the executive ethics code by failing to disclose the donations. She found  there was merit to the suspicions of money laundering over the payment from Bosasa and referred this to the National Prosecuting Authority (NPA) for further investigation. Ramaphosa is  asking  the court to have the report reviewed and set aside. This comes as public enterprises minister Pravin Gordhan awaits  judgment in his urgent application to have  implementation of Mkhwebane’s remedial action against him in her report on the SA Revenue Service’s so-called rogue unit interdicted. PODCAST: Business Day Spotlight - Politicians are putting the SA economy at risk For more episodes, click here. Subscribe: iono.fm | Spotify | Apple Podcast | Pocket Casts | Player.fm High court judge Sulet Potterill reserved judgment in the matter last week, saying she would look at handing down judgment by Monday. Mkhwebane is opposing Gordhan’s application to suspend  implementation of the remedial action. Her advocate Thabani Masuku told the court that ordinarily she would not oppose such an application, but was forced to do so because Gordhan had insulted her in his affidavit to the court. Gordhan is  taking Mkhwebane’s report, in which she found that he had violated the constitution when he established the intelligence unit at Sars, on judicial review. Mkhwebane  found  he had deliberately misled parliament about meeting the controversial Gupta family. The ANC is expected to brief the media on the outcomes of its national executive committee  meeting  in Pretoria at the weekend. The meeting was expected to be  heated  with the issue of national executive committee member and former minister Derek Hanekom’s meeting  the EFF over the removal of former president Jacob Zuma  to be discussed. This came after EFF leader Julius Malema told supporters outside the high court in Pretoria last week that Hanekom had “plotted” with the red berets to bring down Zuma. Hanekom confirmed  he had met EFF secretary-general Godrich Gardee but said there was nothing wrong with two MPs talking. This sparked ANC secretary-general Ace Magashule’s statement calling Hanekom a charlatan for working with the EFF and accusing him of being a wedge driver in the party. Statistics SA is expected to release two reports this week. On Monday, statistician-general Risenga Maluleke will release the 2019 mid-year population estimates report. The report provides estimates on the population of SA and includes current indicators of fertility, mortality and migration among others. On Tuesday, StatsSA will release the results of the quarterly labour force survey for the second quarter of 2019. In May, Maluleke announced that  unemployment  in SA surged to 27.6% in the first quarter, with the economy bleeding 237,000 jobs during the period. This was an increase of 0.5 percentage points, compared to the 27.1% recorded in the fourth quarter of 2018. quintalg@businesslive.co.za