Tokyo — Asian shares edged lower on Thursday as Wall Street stocks dropped on early signs that the US-China trade war could hurt corporate earnings, which helped underpin solid demand for safe-haven US Treasuries. MSCI’s broadest index of Asia-Pacific shares outside Japan eased 0.2%, while Japan’s benchmark Nikkei shed 1.7% and Australian shares fell 0.3%. Chinese shares followed suit, with the benchmark Shanghai Composite and the blue-chip CSI 300 down 0.7% and 0.6%, respectively, while Hong Kong’s Hang Seng retreated 0.5%. South Korea’s market was off 0.4% after the Bank of Korea unexpectedly cut its policy interest rate for the first time in three years, as uncertainties from a trade dispute with Japan added to anxiety about the economy’s outlook. On Wall Street, all three major indexes fell on Wednesday as weak results from trade-related CSX Corp stoked concerns that the protracted trade standoff between the US and China could hurt US corporate earnings. Earlier in the week, US President Donald Trump kept up pressure on Beijing with a threat to put tariffs on another $325bn of Chinese goods, amid market nervousness over when face-to-face talks will resume. The Wall Street Journal reported that progress towards a US-China trade deal has stalled while the Trump administration determines how to address Beijing’s demands that it ease restrictions on Huawei Technologies. The Dow Jones Industrial Average fell 0.4%, the S&P 500 lost 0.7% and the Nasdaq Composite dropped 0.5%. Netflix Inc shares tumbled in after-market trade after the world’s dominant subscription video service lost US streaming customers for the first time in eight years and missed targets for new subscribers overseas, raising worries in an already nervous the market. Treasury yields slid as concerns about the US-China trade war boosted demand for safe-haven debt and after data showed weakness in the US housing market. Yields on benchmark 10-year and 30-year bonds climbed more than seven basis points each, to 2.06% and 2.57%, respectively. US home-building fell for a second straight month in June and permits dropped to a two-year low, suggesting the housing market continued to struggle despite declining mortgage rates. In the foreign exchange market, the dollar nursed light losses on Thursday, weighed down by lower US yields and a rebound by the pound from 27-month lows. The IMF on Wednesday said the dollar was overvalued by 6% to 12%, based on near-term economic fundamentals. The dollar index versus a basket of six major currencies was not much changed at 97.099 after shedding 0.2% the previous day. The euro also was nearly flat at $1.1238 after crawling up marginally 0.1% on Wednesday. The greenback fell 0.2% to ¥107.72, extending an overnight loss of 0.3%. No-deal Brexit Sterling was steady at $1.2437 after stumbling to $1.2382 overnight, its lowest level since April 2017 on concerns of a no-deal Brexit. “Risks of a no-deal Brexit have increased to worryingly high levels. Investors should be concerned,” said Seema Shah, London-based chief strategist at Principal Global Investors. “In the scenario where a no-deal Brexit becomes a realistic prospect, the continued decline in sterling will be just a drop in the ocean.” Britain’s fiscal watchdog is expected to say on Thursday the country’s economy will fall into a recession in 2020 and its economy will be 3% smaller in the event of a “no-deal” Brexit, The Times newspaper reported. Precious metals were in demand, with gold prices hitting their highest in two weeks on Thursday, as weaker-than-expected US data reinforced expectations for an interest rate cut by the US Federal Reserve later in July, dragging the dollar lower. Spot gold gained as much as 0.2% to hit $1,429.10/oz, its highest level since July 3. Silver climbed as much as 1.0% to 16.12, its highest level since February, extending gains for a fourth straight session. Oil prices steadied on Thursday after falling in the previous session when official data showed US stockpiles of products such as gasoline rose sharply last week, suggesting weak demand during the peak driving season. Brent crude futures were up 0.3% to $63.86 a barrel, while USWest Texas Intermediate (WTI) crude futures edged up 0.1% to $56.84 a barrel. Reuters