MTN Group, which said on Friday it had appointed a number of high-profile former politicians as advisers, says former deputy finance minister Mcebisi Jonas will take over as chair when Phuthuma Nhleko steps down in December. The network operator, which has lurched from one regulatory crisis to another in recent years, says it is now in a position to make sweeping board changes as it has “entered a more stable and settled phase”. Among the raft of changes is the appointment of former president Thabo Mbeki as chair of MTN’s new "international advisory board". The mobile operator has a history of courting SA’s political leaders — President Cyril Ramaphosa served as group chair until 2013, for instance. MTN said in a statement that Nhleko, who served as its CEO from 2002 to 2011, would step down as chair on December 15 “after overseeing an orderly transition of the board, including the establishment of the international advisory board”. Jonas, who joined the boards of MTN, Sygnia and Northam Platinum in 2018, and who has become a key witness in SA’s state-capture inquiries, will take over from that date. MTN said the international advisory board, consisting of “prominent persons of considerable and wide-ranging experience”, would become operative in July. That board, to be chaired by Mbeki, will also include former Ghanaian president John Kufuor, former African Union (AU) commissioner for political affairs Aisha Abdullahi, former director-general of the International Atomic Energy Agency Mohamed ElBaradei, president of marketing and services at France’s Total Momar Nguer, and Nhleko. Mergence Investment Managers portfolio manager Peter Takaendesa said the appointment of advisers with leadership experience, particularly in West Africa, "should have been done a long time ago". "Having these experienced people in place will allow the CEO to focus on execution," Takaendesa said, alluding to Rob Shuter’s frequent travels to other African states to put out regulatory fires. Meanwhile, MTN said that in December, Khotso Mokhele would become lead independent director, and Alan Harper, Jeff Van Rooyen and Koosum Kalyan would step down from the board. Peter Mageza and Dawn Marole would leave at the end of April 2020. Lamido Sanusi, a former governor of the Central Bank of Nigeria, as well as Kenyan national Vincent Rague, will join the MTN board in July 2019. MTN’s shares rose 1.4% to R104.99 on Friday. When Nhleko stepped down as CEO at the end of March 2011, the share was at R138.89 hedleyn@businesslive.co.za