Sibanye-Stillwater has become one of the world’s leading sources of platinum group metals (PGM) by successfully taking over number three platinum producer Lonmin, sending their shares soaring. Shares in Sibanye shot up by more than 7% on Tuesday, while Lonmin rocketed up nearly 11%. Shareholders in both companies overwhelmingly supported the R4.2bn all-share transaction that will create a powerful player in the global PGM market, leaving it competing with Anglo American Platinum and Russia’s Norilsk Nickel as the largest producers of platinum and palladium, respectively. Despite calls from some analysts for Lonmin’s largest shareholder, SA’s Public Investment Corporation (PIC), to reject the offer because it undervalued the platinum company, there was a 98.9% vote in favour of the transaction at the company’s London shareholder meeting on Tuesday afternoon. Coupled with the 99.65% vote in favour from the 89% of Sibanye’s shareholders represented at a meeting at the company’s Kloof gold mine, the deal now needs sanction from the UK courts before being concluded. Sibanye CEO Neal Froneman said his “only surprise” was the 0.35% of the company’s shareholders who voted against the deal. Lonmin has noted that it has lost a number of senior employees in the wait for the Sibanye transaction and staff morale is low, leading to a softening of its full-year production target to about 640,000oz of platinum and sharply higher costs. The lack of a better offer from any other company and the feedback from shareholders with stakes in both companies underscored Sibanye’s confidence in the success of the deal, Froneman said. Sibanye has a vast swathe of mines and concentrators bordering Lonmin’s assets that made Sibanye the only logical buyer for those assets to bring down costs and fill the entire processing pipeline, which is not operating at full capacity, he said. The transaction, which was unveiled in December 2017, will make Sibanye one of the world’s largest producers of PGMs, with a rare mine-to-market set of assets, including the base and precious metals refineries that will come with the Lonmin transaction. The price of the four PGMs, when the deal was announced, was about R13,000/oz. It is now R17,000/oz. Froneman said Sibanye will have to revisit job cut plans from the 12,600 retrenchments Lonmin announced at the time and the 890 extra cuts that Sibanye expected. Sibanye has yet to become involved in the management of Lonmin’s mines as would have normally been the case once the Competition Tribunal gave its approval for the deal last November because of an appeal against the decision by the Association of Mineworkers and Construction Union (Amcu). Amcu lost that appeal two weeks ago, clearing the way for the shareholder votes. Lonmin shareholders will own about 11% of the enlarged group if the deal goes ahead. seccombea@bdfm.co.za