Cape Town has unveiled five new policies aimed at desegregating the city. Mayor Dan Plato said on Tuesday all mayoral committee members had been instructed to review existing policies and bylaws to make sure they fit in with the new direction. All the proposals would be subject to a public participation process before being formally adopted‚ he said. The five policies are: cease city-led mass evictions from state land; upgrade all informal settlements; shut down all temporary relocation areas; cease the sale of all city-owned land; and reject policy direction from large developers. Plato said city-led mass evictions recalled “the devastating long-term impact of forced removals on black‚ coloured and Indian communities”. He added: “The mayoral committee recognises the right under the South African constitution to adequate housing in a climate of dignity‚ safety and security. That right‚ indeed‚ is central to the enjoyment of all other rights. “We will shut down the anti-land invasion unit‚ previously responsible for removing homes and shacks‚ and redeploy officers to support the safety of residents living in informal settlements.” Plato said with hundreds of thousands of people living on state land and a housing waiting list that was 20 years long‚ “it is no longer viable to expect residents to wait until formal housing can be provided”. Within five years‚ he wanted to rezone public land for housing‚ establish communal security of tenure‚ install street lighting and roads for emergency services‚ and provide sewerage and electricity services to all households. “In addition‚ we will establish a city-owned depot with subsidised construction materials‚ as well as a resource centre to help families build homes where they live.” Temporary relocation areas such as the notorious “tin can town” of Blikkiesdorp would be closed within three years and their residents would be rehouses in refurbished public buildings or on state land in well located areas. “All residents facing eviction and homelessness from private rental accommodation will not only be provided with emergency accommodation near to where they live‚ but will be supported at court through a guaranteed right to legal representation‚” said Plato. “No-one should have to choose between being made homelessness and living 30km from good infrastructure‚ services and employment.” After several lengthy court fights over the sale of city land‚ Plato said the council had done an about-turn and decided that the “desperate need of many for access to land” meant “we now recognise it to be in breach of our obligations to sell or lease public land that could be used to satisfy that need”. He added: “While the City of Cape Town maintains that it requires new revenue streams to fund budget deficits‚ we now recognise that the long-term social value of land for poverty alleviation far outweighs any possible market value it might have. “We will work with social-housing partners and the provincial and national governments to develop a plan for developing city-owned land into affordable housing in well located areas. “We will review the long-term lease of golf courses and parking lots on city-owned land and prioritise these for affordable housing when leases expire.” Plato said the council would dump its “obeisance to a market logic that has served only the wealthy”. Large developers have spent the last decade building housing that was unaffordable for the vast majority of residents‚ he said. “We vow to engage developers through the planning process to secure affordable housing in the public interest and publish an inclusionary housing policy within the next six months for public comment.” chambersd@businesslive.co.za