EOH  will focus on reducing debt and improving governance as it battles to recover from the damage inflicted by allegations of corrupt dealings with the public sector. Once a high-flying  outfit, the listed technology firm’s share price has dropped more than 60% so far in 2019, wiping about R3.4bn off the company’s market value. A sign of difficult times, EOH said on Tuesday its loss per share  more than doubled for the year to end-July to 2,995c, from  1,367 previously. Its headline earning loss more than tripled to 1,681c loss a share from 546c previously. A forensic report by law firm ENSafrica, which was appointed by EOH before CEO Stephen van Coller joined the company, flagged “suspicious transactions” totalling R1.2bn from 2014-2017. On Tuesday, EOH said ENSafrica had completed about 80% of the investigation into suspicious transactions, with the amount now modified to R935m. This includes transactions with no evidence of valid contracts being in place or where no work was done valued at R665m, as well as R90m of loans written off and overbilling valued at about R180m. The group said the alleged perpetrators had committed wrongdoing at EOH involved enterprise development  partners and intermediaries. The company has since suspended payments to and blacklisted 50 enterprise development business partners implicated in suspect payments, some of whom have  brought legal action against EOH. In addition, further investigation “has also identified various opportunistic incidents of fraud and theft to the prejudice of EOH. This has resulted in the company initiating disciplinary measures which has led to the termination of employment relationships with a number of individuals,” it said. Van Coller said in a statement: “The past 12 months have been difficult for EOH. We have spent extensive time focusing on cleaning up the business both from a governance and financial perspective as well as understanding the group’s strategic capabilities.” The company said it had reduced its gross debt R500m to R3.167bn, after reporting a 2.6% drop in revenues to R11.791bn more than the previous year’s R12.1bn. “In the short term we will focus on continuing to deleverage our balance sheet while implementing governance changes, and more than the longer term we remain steadfast in a vision of a more synergised and focused offering that is well positioned to take advantage of the next wave of change in the ICT industry.” EOH said that it will press criminal charges against employees implicated in corruption after the investigation. Its investigation team is working  with the authorities to ensure that they are able to identify illicit money flows and initiated legal processes to recover losses resulting from the wrongdoing. Under Van Coller, who took the helm in September 2018, EOH has largely cleared out its long-standing leadership structure with the departure of several executives, including founder and chair Asher Bohbot and most recently directors Zunaid Mayet, Rob Godlonton and Pumeza Bam. EOH has said the classification of certain businesses as either continuing or discontinued operations, including assets held for sale, have affected the calculations. “As a result of assessing this affect, certain items included in the half-year [results] as continuing have been reclassified to discontinued.” The company has had to write down and impair certain assets as a result of the investigation. The company said further impairments relate to the overpayment of investments, specifically in Zimbabwe; the effect of the unwinding of the Grid Control Technologies (GCT) transaction; overaggressive historical capitalisation of intangible assets and uneconomic contracting on complex projects resulting in overrecognition of revenue; and work in progress. At 10.40am, EOH's share price was down 2.7% to R12.60, bringing its year-to-date loss to 59.12%. gavazam@businesslive.co.za