JSE-listed employment services group Adcorp, which suffered its worst one-day fall in 25 years earlier in October, said on Wednesday that CEO Innocent Dutiro has resigned amid a review of a turnaround strategy he spearheaded. The company said it will review its operations to ensure it is not doing too much at once, as well as bring forward its results, scheduled for October 28, to end-August. Since Dutiro took the reins in October 2017, Adcorp’s share price has risen 9.4%. Adcorp said on Wednesday that Dutiro had left with immediate effect, but has been discussing his exit with the board. “His departure has been driven by his desire to review his own career after giving two years to the group.” Dutiro had pursued a strategy of cost-cutting and focusing on new businesses, including in consulting and training. The group said on Wednesday it will review current initiatives, “with a view to prioritise them and ensure that the group is not trying to do too many things concurrently”. Small Talk Daily’s Anthony Clark said Dutiro’s resignation is surprising, given that Dutiro was appointed to turn the company around, which he had done to some degree of success. “It does lead to more questions about what is going on inside Adcorp, the company does seem to be on a better footing,” he said. The company’s share price  plummeted 22.5% on October 4, when it warned that headline earnings per share (HEPS) for its six months to end-August would fall up to 94.5%. Many clients in SA had responded to the economic climate by cutting back on their workforce or delaying permanent appointments, the group said at the time. Drought conditions in Australia also put pressure on the group’s Labour Solutions Australia (LSA) business, which primarily provides staff for the agricultural sector. “The past 12 months have seen record-high daily temperatures followed by unprecedented torrential rain and flooding, resulting in widespread crop failures and livestock losses, hence a decline in demand for the staff provided by LSA,” the statement reads. The company’s share price was unchanged at R16.20 on Wednesday. Correction: October 9 2019An earlier version of this story mistakenly said Adcorp suffered its worst one-day share price fall in 16 years on October 4; it was, in fact, the worst in 25 years. Business Day regrets the error. gernetzkyk@businesslive.co.za